---
layout: post
title:      "Zooming Out"
date:       2021-01-18 04:24:31 +0000
permalink:  zooming_out
---


While browsing for "blog inspo" tonight, I came across a really great post by Trey Causey, linked [here](http://treycausey.com/getting_started.html). It really resonated with me. The TL;DR is an overview of what advice Trey would give to someone interested in data science, particularly with the buzz we are so familiar with right now. This post was so refreshing, and caused me to take a step back and look at what I'm doing in my data science journey myself.  
I'm completely new to the tech world. If you've been reading my blog, you know this. I realized tonight that I've treated data science as a checklist - learn Python, Pandas, SQL, neural nets. Check the boxes. Look at job postings. Learn Tableau. I'm not saying this is bad; one of my favorite things about my new career path is the opportunity to keep learning, always. I loved what Trey had to say about "Programmers and data scientists are a fad-driven bunch." We are, for good reason. Each fad builds on the last, making more and more useful languages, packages, and software. It's amazing to see how far programmers go every year. But he's also right when he talks about data science being more than just knowing Python and algorithms. You need to look at the whole picture. You need to zoom out.  
Reading this post made me think of one of my own projects - [Predicting Insulin Prescriptions](https://github.com/kjsampler/Project-4-Predicting-Insulin-Prescriptions). I love this project, it was so fun and feels useful to me. But there's room to improve, by zooming out and looking at the bigger picture. I was so excited to flex my machine learning muscles that I'm not sure I drew the right conclusions. My model may have been 98% accurate, but what does that actually mean? Something that I realized doing the project was that the model could predict *nobody* on insulin, and still be over 98% accurate. So if we're going to use data (especially social data) to make decisions, we need to make sure we're using it correctly. Of course there's domain knowledge involved, but for me personally, this is going to mean getting really cozy with my datasets. The NHANES study that I used for that project was enormous, and there's a million ways to go about using it. It's worth looking into multiple methods.  
Of course, what I love about data science is being able to look back too, and think of these improvements to make on my projects. I may not even draw new conclusions, but at least I'll be able to stick to my guns and know why I support those conclusions. There's something to be said for being able to go to a past project and use the new lens of experience (and lessons learned) on it.  
The last zoom out to talk about is of course related to the job search. It's so easy to type "data scientist" into LinkedIn. In my settings, as of tonight, searching "data scientist" returns 55,187 results. That's a lot of data scientists. But I don't want to just check the box - she knows Python, Pandas, SQL, neural nets. What value can I bring? Where is the intersection of my past with my future in tech? To be a good data scientist, you have to know more than software - you have to really understand the big picture, and what the implications of your research are. Being a scientist implies curiosity, adaptability, communication, and intelligence. If we just needed someone to run code, we'd have built a bot for it by now ;). So for tonight, I'm zooming out, and considering the big picture of what it means to be a data scientist. 
