---
layout: post
title:      "Just an Update"
date:       2021-06-07 01:06:49 +0000
permalink:  just_an_update
---


Well if I thought last week was busy, it didn't hold a candle to this week. I've been packed with meetings, working at my "day job" in the pharmacy, and the Omdena project that I'm working on is really taking off. And of course taking full advantage of the Western Colorado mountains-meet-desert June heat. So for this week, I would like to just do a quick update on my favorite technical highlights of the week. If not for my readers, then just so I can keep everything straight!  

The first thing to discuss is that I don't think the wildfire dataset is going to make a great personal project. I went ahead and put it to bed for now at least. I think it's a great dataset, but as I started doing more and more data exploration, I just wasn't seeing what I... expected. There was a lot of data that related to the geometric shape of the fire that just didn't make a whole lot of sense at this point. Another big turn off was that my code to take data from a SQL table and put it into a Pandas dataframe worked for some but not all tables. Overall, at this point, I just wasn't feeling as inspired by the data as I would hope I would. I'm sure that with enough research and going over what other people have done with the data I could come up with something. But for a personal project I  would really like to be feeling a lot of passion for it, and I'm not sure that this dataset has that to offer.  

But, that leads me to my next good news. I found a new dataset about SNAP (formerly Food Stamps) and WIC data in the US. The SNAP data goes all the way back to the 60's. The data is in a .csv already, so it may be on the easier side (I'm hoping I'm not jinxing myself here) to work with, but it is government data, and I have experience to say that means it probably isn't clean. During this project I'm going to start in a similar way- I'd like to take a look at the data and start cleaning it, and hope that a question comes to me that I can use my data science "tool belt" to answer. Two things that I would like to implement in this project: researching new tools by reading blogs and communicating with my network, and weekly "to do" lists, rather than just seeing what happens. I think the organization should help a lot.  

As far as my Omdena project- it's at such an exciting point right now. The tasks (which anyone can create) are becoming more organized and therefore able to work together a lot better. I'm currently following task-1 which is collecting the data to train our NLP models on. I was having a really difficult time jumping in, but at our last task meeting, I noticed that we were talking quite a lot about how we were going to label our test data- we're going to be using a supervised model. This is where it gets exciting for me- I created my own task! I created a task just for gathering an "official" training dataset for each platform we are scraping, deciding on what the labels (categories) are, deciding on a program to use for the labeling, and doing the heavy lifting of actually labeling the data. I think next we are going to have to decide how to put all of the data into one dataframe for the NLP team to use. I am even helping to facilitate a meeting so we can come to an agreement on which tools to use. It's exciting to jump in!  

This week has been very code-heavy for me. Every day I'm not in the pharmacy, I'm going to meetings and learning more about how to improve myself professionally. The best advice I got was to work on my confidence, and that was actually very encouraging to hear. Even outside of Flatiron, I'm learning SO much- which makes me so happy. I think I'm gaining the technical foundation to be able to speak with confidence about the things I'm learning and things I've done. I'm really excited about this point in my tech career, and can't wait to check in again next week! 
